Navigate to The Fun Park
Interpreting ECG
ECG interpretation should be systematic
Some messages will have abnormalities that jump off the page of you
Anime only take a second term what's going on
Before you can sign off on any ECG you must go through the entire sequence of interpretation
Sometimes an extremely subtle change can be the ticket
2 diagnosis
So you have to make sure that no stone is left Unturned
The ECG machine will print its own interpretation
As you can see here
The machine will try to evaluate
The rate
Rhythm
Intervals and even ischemic changes
However it is absolutely critical for the stoop clinician to interpret and calculate these for themselves
Asthma machine interpretation is often incorrect
It can be tempting to use the machines a shortcut
However machines will recognize interference as true reflections
And may use this artifact to calculate intervals that are completely wrong
I've seen heart attacks red is normal by the machine
And I've seen normal ECGs read his heart attacks
I cannot stress enough how important it is for you to interpret ECG for yourself
And only then can you consider using the machine interpretation as confirmation
In fact you can see that the machine read this ECG is atrial flutter
But is actually
Sinus tachycardia
If you trusted the machine interpretation that this is atrial flutter
Then you may prescribe the wrong medications and harm the patient
This is a perfect example of why we shouldn't be relying on machines for ECG interpretation
The last thing you should know before we dive into ECG interpretation is how the voltage and timing are shown on the ECG
An ECG is printed on a grid
One small box is 1 mm in width and height
5 small boxes make up one large box and large boxes are printed with much thicker lines
The x axis corresponds to time
An ECG is recorded at 25 mm per second
And since one box
Is 1 mm width
The ECG is recorded a 25 small boxes per second
Does one small box or 1 mm corresponds to 0.04 seconds
And one large box or 5mm
Corresponds to 0.2 seconds
The y-axis corresponds to voltage
Normally one small box or one millimeter corresponds to one tenth of noble
So one large box corresponds to 5 10 in height
Calibration
Checking the height of the calibration signal is an often ignored first step of ECG interpretation
ECGs indicator calibration with A1 Melville signal at the beginning or end of the tracing
I just told you that under normal circumstances each small box corresponds to a tenth of a millivolt in height
So the one Melville calibration signal corresponds to 10 small box
As shown here
However some heart problems can cause the ECG to have deflections of extreme magnitude
Touch they don't fit on the page with this normal calibration
The machine cuts the size of the deflection in half by having one small box correspond to 0.2 ml
Instead of the normal 0.1 millivolts
You can tell the calibration is changed because the one Melville calibration signal now spans five small boxes
Instead of time
Take a look at this ECG
It looks strange doesn't it
The deflections look tiny here here here
The weight is barely deviate from the Baseline
At first look you probably think something is wrong with this patient heart to make that you said you look so abnormal
However take a look at the calibration signal
It is only 2 and 1/2 small boxes tall
Since we know the signal always corresponds to 1 Melville then we know that
Two and a half boxes now equals 1
This means that each small box is now 0.4 ml instead of the usual 0.1
Now for example a reflection of
0.8 millivolts corresponds to only two small boxes in height
Instead of the normal rate small box
This is why these deflections seem so small
The person who set up the ECG machine enter the calibration incorrectly
But racing is actually normal
But you will only be able to determine this
If you are diligent and noticed the abnormal calibration
If this seems complicated then let me simplify
If the calibration signal corresponds to 10 small boxes in height
Can you have normal calibration and can move on
If the signal corresponds to a different number boxes then you have to consider the ECG in the context of a non-standard caliber
Now we come to heart rate
A normal heart rate is between 60 and 100 beats per minute
Although many people drop below 60 when they sleep
Highly-trained athletes may have a normal heart rate in the 50
Most arrhythmia will cause a patient's heart to drastically slow down or speed up
So determining the heart rate is crucial for ruling in or ruling out arrhythmia
A heart rate below 60 beats per minute is called bradycardia
And a heart rate above 100 beats per minute is called tachycardia
There are a ton of ways to determine heart rate and most require complex math and formulas
We're going to make your life easy and give you the two quick-and-dirty ways
That way when your attending hands when usage and ask for the rate
You can answer in seconds rather than whipping out scrap paper and working through formulas
These methods give you more of an approximation than exact heart rate
The doctors really need to know exact rates
Estimates will almost always suffice
Sing the heart rate is approximately 82 beats per minute when is actually 84 beats per minute will not have clinical implications
The first method is called the 300 150-175 6050 roll
That's a mouthful some refer to this as the 300 method
You count a large boxes in between consecutive Beats
You can use P wave to P wave are we too are wave or any other end of all that corresponds to one full cycle
If there's only one large box between two consecutive beats then they will be 300 beats in 1 minute
If there are two large boxes between consecutive beats than the rate is 150 beats per minute
3 large boxes means a hundred beats per minute
4 large boxes mean 75 beats per minute
5 large boxes mean 60 beats per minute
And 6 large boxes means 50 beats per minute
Hence the name 300 150 175 60 50 rule
Feel free to look at the derivation of these numbers but we don't think it's worth including here
Not for the second method
The Rhythm strips are 10 seconds long
If you count the number of beats within the Rhythm strip
Then you know how many beats are per 10 seconds
Simply multiply this number by 6 to get the number of beats per 60 Seconds
Heart beats per minute
If there are 12 beats on the Rhythm strip
The heart rate is approximately 72 beats per minute
This method is especially useful when the heart rhythm is a regular which can be a pathological or normal variation between beats that occur
Occurs with inspiration expiration which is called sinus arrhythmia
Let's look at this example
Will determine the heart rate
Using both methods so you get some practice
Let's start by using the 300 method
Let's choose this one as a starting point
Because the r-wave is almost exactly on the line
As you can see here
There's just under 5 large boxes between consecutive Beats
This means that the heart rate is just over 60 beats per minute
What's a 63 beats per minute
Now let's use the Rhythm strip method
Account 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 QRS complex within the
10-second Rhythm strip
Multiplying 11 by 6 year old heart rate of 66 beats per minute
See how quick these methods are while still yielding approximately the same answer within 3 beats per minute
The correct answer is 130 to 140 beats per minute
Therefore this is your first abnormal ECG
The normal heart rate is less than 100 beats per minute heart rate of 130 to 140 beats per minute is considered
Tachycardic
Using the 300 method
You can see that they are just over two large boxes between II of Beats which course monster just under
150 beats per minute let's say 135 beats per minute
Now using the Rhythm strip rule
Account
23 QRS complexes
In the 10-second Rhythm strip which corresponds to 138 beats per minute
Rhythm
Determining the rhythm is one of the most high-yield topics we're going to discuss both clinically and for exam purpose
A normal rhythm is called sinus rhythm indicating that the impulses are initiated by the sinoatrial node
For SA node
In sinus rhythm atrial depolarization begins of the SA node and spreads in Fairly to the AV node
Before ventricular depolarization
So the ECG must meet the following criteria
Every P wave is followed by QRS complex
This shows
All atrial impulses are transmitted through to the ventricles
Number two is that every QRS is preceded by a p-wave
And this shows that all ventricular impulses were triggered initially by an atrial depolarization
And the third criteria is that the P wave is upright in Lee's one and two
The atrial impulse initiates in the SA node at the superior portion of the right atrium
From there it spreads both leftwards the left h
And in Fairly
To the AV node
It's about the inferior leads 2 3 and avf and the left lateral leads
1 and AVL
Should show positive deflections during atrial depolarization
Since the impulses traveling towards the positive end of those leads
This is why the p waves should be upright in leads 1 and 2 if the impulse is truly originating that's a no
This last Criterion is
Often forgotten or ignored
What is really required for you to assert that the ECG shows sinus rhythm
If the heart rate is between 60 and 100
The misses called normal sinus rhythm
If the Rhythm follows these criteria but the rate is less than 60
This is called sinus bradycardia
At the rate of greater than 100 this is called sinus tachycardia
Sinus bradycardia and sinus tachycardia are examples of arrhythmias
Which will be discussed in detail later in the module
Now we come to intervals
The PR interval is the time between the beginning of the P wave in the beginning of the QRS complex
The normal PR interval is between .12 and 20 seconds
Which corresponds to three to five small boxes
In this example the PR's about 5 boxes or
.20 seconds
The PR interval reflects atrial emptying into The ventricle
A shorting of this interval means of the ventricles are Contracting very soon after the onset of atrial contraction
What can happen in several arrhythmias
Lengthening means there's an abnormally long delay
Between atrial contraction and ventricular contraction
Just called AV block
Will discuss AV Block in detail in a later module
The QRS interval is the time between the beginning and the end of the QRS complex
The normal duration for the QRS interval
Is less than .12 seconds or three small box
In this example is almost
Exactly 3 small box
The QRS should be nice and crisp to ensure that the ventricles are Contracting as a unit to maximize pumping efficiency
There's nothing that really causes a short in the QRS but many things can cause a lengthening of the QRS interval
QRS duration can be affected by conduction delays of the his purkinje bundle
As well as electrolyte imbalances
Is relatively common for a patient to have a left or right bundle branch block
And this block in the conducting pathway of the ventricles
Muse the takes longer for the ventricles
Chicken track entirely which lengthens the QRS duration
The QT interval with the time between the beginning of the QRS complex and the end of the T wave so it represents the time between the big
Beginning of ventricular depolarization
And the end of ventricular repolarization
If the heart rate is in the normal range you can use
This is a shortcut
If the QT interval is normal if it is less than half of the interval between two consecutive QRS complexes
The QT interval is affected by heart rate
The QT interval is shorter if the heart rate is faster and is longer if heart rate is slower
Therefore the QT interval must be corrected for heart rate
This corrected value is known as the QTC
QTC is calculated by Bizet formula
Dividing the Cutie duration by the square root of the RR interval which of the time between consecutive are waves
The normal QTC
Is less than or equal to
.44 seconds
As a quick conceptual point you should know that the QRS duration does not change with heart rate
Because ventricular contraction is a fixed entity
If the heart wants to speed up it will shorten ventricular filling
But it will not shorten ventricular contraction time
The truck here shows three important information about intervals
Most of ECG interpretation is conceptual
But intervals are one thing that you might want to memorize
Finally we come to the mean QRS axis
Mean QRS axis represents the average direction of electrical forces during ventricular contraction
Although understanding me access is necessary for Proficiency in interpreting ECG
It is relatively low yield for exam purposes so we will keep this discussion brief
We already introduced the axial reference system when we discuss the limb leads earlier
With this in mind
A normal axis is from negative 30 degrees to positive 90
If the axis is less than -30 degrees you have left axis deviation
At the axis is greater than positive 90° then you have write Access TV
Let me start out by saying that mean QRS axis is determined by looking only at the limb leads
Just leave can be ignored for this park
Also access is only related to the QRS complex
Sonor p-wave and t-wave
You should also know that isoelectric lines are perpendicular to the direction of the lead
First look at the QRS of Lead 1
Lead 1.20 degrees so it's isoelectric line would be vertical
If the QRS complex is mostly in the positive direction
The axis is anywhere in the Shaded region
Now you have to look at lead 2 which runs towards positive 60-degree
Therefore it's isoelectric line is right here
If the QRS complex in lead II is mostly positive than the axes anywhere in this shade
Therefore if the QRS is positive in both Lead 1 and Lead 2
Let me access will fall within the region of overlap
Which is exactly from negative 30 degrees deposit 90 degrees
This would be a normal axis
Now what if lead one has a positive QRS but lead to has a negative QRS
We won't stay the same cuz it's still positive
But now you would say the opposite side of the isoelectric line of lead to
In this case the reason of overlap is less than -30 degrees
Therefore if lead one is positive and lead to is negative you have left axis deviation
Next
What if lead 1 is negative and leave two is positive
You would say the left side of the isoelectric line for Lead 1
You would shade the positive side of the isoelectric line of lead to
Now the overlap is here
Which is further positive
Then positive 90 degrees
Therefore when the QRS is negative in Lead 1 and positive and lead to you have write access
Deviation
Finally what if lead one and lead two are both negative
You would say the left side of the isoelectric line for Lead 1 and the negative side of the isoelectric line for lead to
The region of overlap is out here
You can form one extra step in the circumstance
Look at lead avf which point straight downward
So the isoelectric line is horizontal
If the QRS complex is mostly positive in the region of overlap for all three leads would be here
This is greater than positive 90° so we would call this right Axis deviation
If the QRS complex in lead avf is mostly negative
The region of overlap is up here in no-man's-land and you call this indeterminate Acts
Left axis deviation commonly occurs in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy
If the left ventricle has a thicker myocardium than usual
I mean overall electrical forces will be skewed towards the left
And you'll have left axis deviation
The same is true of the right
If the right ventricle is enlarged asthma case of right ventricular hypertrophy
Then the overall electrical forces during ventricular contraction be skewed to the right and you will have right Axis deviation
I can make access extremely simple
If the QRS complex in Lead 1 and 2 are primarily
Positive deflection Stony axis is normal
If lead 1 is positive believe to is negative
Then you have left axis deviation
If lead one is negative but leave to is positive than you have right Axis deviation
If we wanted me to or both negative then you look at a BF
If ever you have positive than your right Axis deviation and if a BF is negative you have an indeterminate axis
Now you've learned the standard sequence of ECG interpretation including calibration rate
Rhythm intervals in Access
In future modules we will be introducing all of the abnormalities that you may find on ECG
Please keep the basics in mind and always go through the entire progression of interpretation